Executive Summary
The multiple fast moving fires on August 8, 2023, and their aftermath, cannot be understated. Maui experienced
the worst natural disaster in State history and the deadliest U.S. wildfire in over a century. The fires were vast,
devastating and rapidly occurred simultaneously within multiple geographic locations throughout Maui. Lahaina
town sustained the greatest loss of life and a significant amount of property damage. In total, the fires claimed 100
lives, burned 1,283 acres upcountry, 3,240 acres in south Maui, and 2,170 acres in Lahaina. At last count, the fires
also destroyed dozens of homes upcountry and over 3,000 dwellings and units in Lahaina. Throughout the fires, the
initial aftermath, and until today, the resilience of the community never faltered. The selflessness displayed truly
showcased that in the face of adversity, the spirit of aloha not only stands true, but it shines bright.
The Maui Police Department, in collaboration with other emergency response agencies, worked tirelessly to ensure
the safety of our residents, coordinate evacuations, and provide support to those in need. The bravery and resilience
demonstrated by our officers, personnel, fellow first responders, and members of the community who continued to
assist the community while suffering losses themselves, have been nothing short of extraordinary. The final after-
action report (AAR) will discuss the recommendations that were completed and those that were not.
The purpose of this after-action report is to evaluate the effectiveness of police actions, identify strengths and areas
for improvement, and make recommendations to enhance future natural disaster response efforts. To date, 32
recommendations have been put forward, many of which have been implemented or are in progress.
While this preliminary after-action report provides a comprehensive overview of the police response to the recent
wildfire incident that occurred on August 8, 2023, its focus is primarily on the Lahaina fires.
The Morgue Identification and Notification Task Force (M.I.N.T.) was created and operated at the MPD . This team
was comprised of traffic officers, detectives, police evidence specialists, a fingerprint identification technician,
forensic pathologists, and outside agency support. Decedents were examined for injury and positively identified via
scientific methodology including fingerprints, DNA, dental, and medical device comparison. Next of kin was notified
in-person, a family briefing was held for families of confirmed decedents and those unaccounted for, and up-to-date
information was provided to families throughout the process as their family member was transferred to their chosen
mortuary. This was an effective and collaborative effort due to the constant communication, problem solving,
adaptability of all involved parties, and driven by sincere desire to serve the community through their loss.

Fire Locations Map
Three of the four fires depicted in the map below are in separate districts. At approximately 12:22 a.m. on August
8, 2023, the Olinda fire began and quickly drew concern as the wind fueled flames rapidly, endangered structures
and prompted evacuations. At approximately 6:35 a.m., a fire started near Lahaina Intermediate School prompting
evacuations of multiple neighborhoods. Within a few hours, the Lahaina fire was contained. By 11:30 a.m., a fire
started in Kula. At approximately 2:55 p.m. a fire was reported and was spreading rapidly in Lahaina while the fires
in Olinda and Kula continued to burn. By 5:59 p.m., a fire was reported off of Pulehu Road that quickly spread
towards Kihei. As each fire required evacuation assistance by MPD personnel, regular calls for service created
additional strains on all police districts throughout Maui County.

Lahaina fire: total area burned - 2,170 acres
Olinda fire: total area burned -1,081 acres
Kula fire: total area burned - 202 acres
Pulehu/Kihei fire: total area burned - 3,240 acres

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge that recounting the traumatic events of the day, as they unfolded, may evoke a wide range of
emotional reaction in the reader. We especially acknowledge those who offered us their personal accounts of what
they experienced on August 8, 2023. We strongly encourage anyone reliving the trauma of this historic tragedy to
consider seeking professional assistance for emotional well-being at www.mauinuistrong.info.
We would like to thank MPD personnel, local first responders, and community members who have taken the time
to provide us with their recollection of that tragic day on August 8, 2023.

Methodology
On August 9, 2023, and each day thereafter, MPD initiated efforts to document how the incident response was being
managed and all related aspects of doing so. In the many weeks and months that followed, information from a
variety of sources was obtained and analyzed to become the foundation of this review. The following partner
agencies supplied MPD with resources and information that assisted in the development of this preliminary after-
action report (AAR):
 Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF)
 California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE)
 Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency (DPAA)
 Department of Justice (DOJ)
 Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
 Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Urban Search and Rescue Branch (USAR)
 Hawaii National Guard:
 Hawaii National Guard Joint Task Force 50
 Hawaii National Guard Task Force Maui 230th Engineer Company
 Hawaii National Guard Civil Support–1 Company/CMRN Enhanced Response Force Package (CERFP)
 Hawaii National Guard Air Force Security Forces Quick Reaction Force (QRF)
 Hawaii Police Department (HPD)
 Honolulu Police Department (HPD)
 Maui Fire Department (MFD)
 National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)–Transportation Disaster Assistance Division
 US Army 25th Infantry Division
 US Army Corps of Engineers
Live data documentation began on August 8, 2023 and consisted of officer reports body-worn camera (BWC) videos,
open source videos, news, social media, and community member recollections.
Chief Pelletier requested information preservation collection and analysis related to the department’s collective
response to the Maui wildfires beginning August 9, 2023.
Data from the M.I.N.T. operations were also collected.
Weekly meetings were held to ensure the AAR team had access to the information and data required to put forth
an accurate depiction of the disaster and response.
While this preliminary report contains a picture with existing data and resources, the final AAR may offer additional
insight through further investigation and interviews.