POLICE DEPARTMENT
COUNTY OF MAUI
55 MAHALANI STREET
WAILUKU, MAUI, HAWAII 96793
TELEPHONE: (808) 244-6400
FAX: (808) 244-6411
JOHN PELLETIER
CHIEF OF POLICE
WADE M. MAEDA
DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE
During the hours of August 8, 2023, Maui became the stage for the most tragic natural disaster in state history and the deadliest fire in modem American history. 
There were multiple simultaneous fires on the island, with the most significant occurrence in Lahaina where 100 people would lose their lives.
In the days and months since this incident, the Maui Police Department has worked uncompromisingly to detail our response. 
This preliminary after-action report is a critical review detailing our preparedness, initial response, evacuation, coordination with other emergency response agencies, recovery, command and control, identification and notification, media response, wellness of our personnel, and training/equipment. 
This report gives multiple recommendations for lessons leamed, which is, I believe, crucial to assessing and reflecting upon our actions.
MPD considers itself to be a progressive and evolving law enforcement organization.
We strive to find out what went right, what did not, and how we can improve so that we can serve our community and profession to the best of our ability.
In policing, we respond to dynamic and evolving situations. We cannot control the incidents we respond to; we can, however, control our responses in the aftermath. 
To enhance our preparedness and response capabilities for future incidents, MPD chose to evaluate this incident so others within the profession can learn from our response. 
An extensive review of our work can save lives, which is without a doubt, the ultimate goal of law enforcement.
MPD is grateful to all the local, state, and federal partners for their assistance with the incident and this after-action report.
We also thank the incredible men and women of this department and the unknown heroes of our community. 
We owe our deepest mahalo to the countless individuals, businesses and organizations of Maui County and beyond who supported MPD and other first responders. 
They will always be part of our Ohana and we will forever be Maui Strong!

THE ABOVE INFORMATION IS FROM A LETTER RELEASED BY THE POLICE DEPARTMENT


Overview of the Maui Police Department
Mission Statement
The Mission of the Maui Police Department (MPD) is to serve our community in a manner that epitomizes the ideals
woven into the fabric of the Constitution of the United States and the Spirit of Aloha. We will strive to enhance the
quality of life in cooperation with all who share these beautiful islands in making this a better place to live. We are
committed to excellence through:
INTEGRITY We will be honest and sincere in our personal and professional lives. We serve with courage and pride in
maintaining the public trust by upholding the highest moral and ethical standards.
COMPASSION We will be sensitive yet firm while dedicating ourselves to preserving the dignity of each individual.
Our cultural diversity allows us to be patient, caring, and kind in our treatment towards each other.
FAIRNESS We will consistently treat all people fairly and impartially in upholding the laws of the State of Hawaii and
the Constitution of the United States.
SERVICE We will dedicate ourselves to improve and ensure the quality of life in our community for future generations
through professional and quality service. We are committed to protecting life and property, preventing and solving
crime, reducing fear and providing a safe environment. We will strive to work in unity with our community to develop
a partnership in solving problems and to be responsive to community needs and concerns.
Personnel
The Maui County Police Department is organized in accordance with Section 8, Chapter 12.1 of the Charter of the
County of Maui. There shall be a department of police consisting of a police commission, a chief of police, and the
necessary staff.
The CEO of the Maui Police Department is the chief of police. Under the chief of police there are 300 sworn officers
and approximately 98 civilians which include the deputy chief of police and three assistant chiefs of police. In August
2023, department personnel included 296 sworn officers and 96 civilians throughout Maui County. As of August
2023, departmental vacancies of sworn officers indicated a shortage of approximately 25%. The vacancies in civilian
positions are equally challenging, including a 51% shortage in the communications section (dispatch).
The Maui Police Department has six districts and police stations. They are located in Wailuku (headquarters), Lanai,
Hana, Lahaina, Molokai and Kihei. These six districts serve 29 motorized beats.

Geography of Maui County and Lahaina
The County of Maui is comprised of four of the eight Hawaiian islands (Maui, Molokai, Lanai, Kahoolawe),
geographically 50% of the state. The population is approximately 160,000 and the officer ratio is 1.85 officers for
every one thousand residents. Generally, the tourist population adds another 25,000 to 75,000 people depending
on the season.
Lahaina Geography:
The town of Lahaina, located on the western most part of Maui, spans about 7.8 square miles of both developed
and undeveloped land. Lahaina is characterized by a singular access point, the Honoapiilani Highway (Hwy 30),
which is the only major road that travels through Lahaina, and is the primary route for transportation and logistics,
connecting Lahaina to the rest of the island.
Lahaina Population:
According to the most recent census, the population of Lahaina is about 13,000 residents. In addition to its resident
population prior to the fire the town was a popular tourist destination to thousands daily.