A. Officer Accounts
The following are summaries of interviews with MPD officers as they relate to the Lahaina fires.
Officer Account 1
In the 5:00 a.m. hour of August 8, 2023, a Lahaina specialized unit officer noticed multiple utility poles down or near
falling on Honoapiilani Highway between Keawe and Kenui Streets in Lahaina. The officer took a traffic post at this
location to keep vehicles away from roadway hazards that were being threatened by the extremely high winds. A
little after 6:00 a.m., the officer was alerted about a fire, and responded to assist with the evacuations of
neighborhoods off Lahainaluna Road.
After the fire was reported as contained, the officer responded and assisted at other locations where poles had
broken off their base and were blocking or leaning over roadways. Multiple roads were blocked due to fallen utility
poles with suspended cables and wires. Police secured multiple locations to keep pedestrians and vehicles away
from roadway hazards.
At approximately 2:55 p.m., the officer learned of another fire in the same area and proceeded to assist with
evacuations. The officer continued on Lahainaluna Road to evacuate residents. The officer also traveled through
Kelawea Street and Aki Street where the officer encountered an elderly female having difficulty walking. While still
announcing evacuations, the officer got the female into their police vehicle and traveled down Kale Street back to
Lahainaluna Road. The officer transported the female to the Lahaina Civic Center and returned to patrol. Observing
heavy traffic on Front Street, the officer assisted in directing traffic at Honoapiilani Highway, Front Street and Fleming
Road. The officer then parked on the highway blocking southbound lanes and proceeded on foot to Front Street
and observed slow moving vehicles. The officer urgently directed vehicles to speed up as the officer knew the fire
was moving down Lahainaluna Road rapidly, while some motorists were seemingly unaware of the situation just a
mile south.
As traffic flowed north and onto the highway, the officer proceeded south to the area of Shaw Street to assist with
more evacuations. Visibility in this area was extremely poor due to the smoke and the fast approaching fire. The
officer directed vehicles out of the Ka Hale A Ke Ola Westside Center, to head south on the highway. It was at this
time that the officer was approached by a firefighter who requested to use the officer’s patrol vehicle. Shortly
thereafter, that same firefighter returned with multiple firefighters, one of which was unresponsive. The officer
assisted with life-saving efforts and coordinated with other officers on the outskirts of town to help medics find a
way into the area. Medics arrived and transported the firefighter to the hospital.
The officer then continued to assist with facilitating evacuations of heavy traffic and other evacuations in the area.
This continued until the morning of August 9, 2023.
Officer Account 2 and 3
On August 8, 2023, two Wailuku District police officers, unable to contact family due to a severe brush fire in Lahaina,
learned of the escalating emergency situation in the Lahaina District. They volunteered to assist and headed to
Lahaina. The officers reported heavy winds, thick smoke, downed utility poles and debris rendering Honoapiilani
Highway impassable.
Despite the hazardous conditions, the officers were determined to reach those in need. They encountered several
impassable areas due to engulfed structures and extreme smoke. These officers responded to a call at Territorial
MPD’s Preliminary After-Action Report
16 | P a g e
Savings Bank on Papalaua Street where they successfully evacuated approximately 15 people sheltering in the Coffee
Bean & Tea Leaf and others trapped in a van, leading them to safety at the Lahaina Civic Center.
In their attempts to rescue more individuals reportedly trapped in the vacant Bubba Gump restaurant, the officers
faced insurmountable obstacles from downed power lines and raging fires. The extreme conditions forced them to
focus on directing people in the area to safety.
The officers were later assigned to control traffic at Honoapiilani Highway to support the evacuation and utility
repairs. The officers proceeded to provide security at Maui Preparatory Academy where the Red Cross established
a new temporary shelter. They maintained their post until sunrise.
Officer Account 4
On the morning of August 8, 2023, this Lahaina Patrol officer noticed smoke while on duty and was soon dispatched
to a fire near Kuialua and Hookahua Streets. Upon arrival, he discovered a house on Hookahua Street surrounded
by flames. With the fire fast approaching the residence, the officer forcibly entered the house, rescuing an elderly
male who was seemingly unaware of the impending fire.
Following this incident, the officer’s attention was turned to Lahaina managing traffic and addressing hazards such
as fallen utility poles, cables, wires, and other debris throughout Lahaina roadways. The officer took lead of traffic
control at the intersection on Honoapiilani Highway and Lahainaluna Road to protect the highway as a useable exit
from Lahaina to the south.
That afternoon, the officer responded to another rapidly spreading fire near Kuialua Place. Faced with thick smoke
and intense flames, the officer used the police vehicle's P.A. system to urgently evacuate residents. However,
visibility issues and the fire's speed made it challenging to access and evacuate all areas. The rapid spread of the fire
and reduced visibility made the evacuation challenging, prompting him to direct residents to alternative escape
routes due to gridlocked traffic.
As the situation escalated, officers worked to alleviate traffic congestion on key streets, redirecting vehicles to
alternative routes to facilitate evacuations. This redirection was critical in alleviating the chain reaction of traffic
that was building up in the neighborhoods nearest the fire.
In a crucial move, the officer collaborated with a civilian and a county employee to unlock a series of gates and lead
evacuees down a dirt road, creating a vital escape path for vehicles. This quick action allowed many to flee the
rapidly advancing fire.
Throughout the night, the officer's relentless efforts continued by evacuating residents to the emergency shelter set
up at the Lahaina Civic Center. Despite some residents' reluctance to leave their homes, the officer persisted in his
evacuation efforts, ensuring the safety of as many people as possible.
Evacuation efforts continued throughout the night and into the following morning.
Officer Account 5 and 6
On August 8, 2023, two Lahaina patrol officers rode together as they were dispatched to a fire flare-up near Kuialua
Street. Upon arrival, they began evacuating nearby streets as the fire grew rapidly. During evacuation efforts, the
officers discovered a shed and debris on fire at a property on Hookahua Street. They, along with a supervising officer,
managed to contain the fire with garden hoses until the arrival of a fire engine.
The officers then moved to assist with evacuations below the bypass along Lahainaluna Road as the fire had jumped
the Lahaina Bypass and was moving west quickly. They encountered significant challenges due to heavy smoke,
MPD’s Preliminary After-Action Report
17 | P a g e
decreasing visibility, and heavy traffic which had caused a gridlock headed west on Lahainaluna Road. Despite these
conditions, they continued evacuation efforts using their P.A. system to guide residents. As the officers attempted
to move west to continue evacuating the lower portions of Lahainaluna Road, they observed traffic at a standstill as
the fire was engulfing the area within feet of stopped vehicles. They then began redirecting traffic to Komo Mai
Street to evacuate the area and alleviate traffic on Lahainaluna Road.
As they did so, the officers were tasked with checking on a senior living center along Lahainaluna Road but found
the road impassable due to the fire and a fire truck in the roadway. The officers redirected their efforts to managing
the heavy buildup of traffic which was backed up due to roadway obstructions such as suspended power lines and
broken utility poles rendering some areas impassable.
The officers directed traffic on Keawe Street in an attempt to clear the chain reaction of traffic in the neighborhoods
nearest the fire. Eventually, an alternative evacuation route via a dirt road off of Keawe Street was identified and
vehicles were directed to evacuate via that route. Almost simultaneously, they discovered that the Lahaina bypass,
south bound, was also now safe and directed traffic through this route to facilitate evacuations south out of Lahaina
town.
The officers then responded to the area of Honoapiilani Highway and Hokiokio Road to help facilitate the movement
of traffic that was also gridlocked in that area. Soon after, they escorted medics back into Lahaina town to assist
with a report of a fireman that was having a medical emergency.
As the fire neared the Ka Hale A Ke Ola shelter, the officers continued evacuation efforts of the area and guided
vehicles through zero-visibility conditions. These officers continued to rescue multiple individuals that had been on
foot in the Lahaina town area. They then shuttled them to safe locations.
The officers continued evacuations and managed traffic until the early hours of the next day. They eventually
returned to the police station for refueling and further assignments. The situation remained critical with ongoing
evacuations and traffic control in affected areas.
Officer Account 7
On August 8, 2023, a school resource officer and Lahaina resident awoke to strong winds and a power outage at
home. Hours later, the officer observed a wildfire rapidly approaching from the mountainside near Lahainaluna
Road, forcing an evacuation of the officer’s family.
After evacuating his family, he immediately reported for duty, assisting in evacuations of Lahainaluna Road. The
officer witnessed homes on fire and experienced severe smoke and fire, hindering visibility.
The officer observed multiple instances of dangerous conditions, including homes fully engulfed in flames, trapped
individuals, and people fleeing the area. Despite zero visibility and hazardous conditions, the officer continued to
assist, evacuating residents and responding to calls for help. The officer evacuated Wainee Street, including a senior
living center, and transported numerous people to safety.
Throughout the officer’s shift, the officer faced numerous challenges such as navigating through smoke-filled streets,
avoiding burning structures, and evacuating stranded residents. The officer prioritized evacuating residents to safer
locations, including the emergency shelter located at the Lahaina Civic Center. The officer evacuated multiple
neighborhoods, including ones below Honoapiilani in Lahaina as well as the Wahikuli neighborhood.