FBI Roles and Unaccounted for List
The FBI Evidence Response Team (ERT) from Honolulu Field Office members started assistance on Maui August 12,
2023. There were 11 FBI ERT agents and civilians who helped with autopsy documentation, evidence submission,
and photograph organization. They helped set up shelving, moved equipment (Rapid DNA instruments), transported
bodies at the morgue, and did general housekeeping. Their final departure was August 24, 2023.
Other FBI agents, alongside MPD, were invaluable in following thousands of initial missing persons leads with the
objective of arriving at the consolidated confirmed number of unaccounted for persons. This was done by meeting
with family members, calling them, and working data bases. At the time of this writing, only four of the 133 valid
missing persons cases are still open and active. The FBI was also involved in assisting with the collection of family
reference DNA samples from willing family members off-island to include the mainland and abroad. It was clearly
communicated that these samples would only be used for identification of decedents.
An FBI Latent Print Unit specialist from the FBI laboratory aided with recovery of decedent fingerprints from August
16 to 25, 2023. The specialist also instructed autopsy team members and the Fingerprint Identification Technician
in various techniques for recovering decedent prints. The specialist utilized the FBI Criminal Justice Information
Services (CJIS) Division, along with the FBI Laboratory Latent Print Unit, for searching prints through the FBI’s Next
Generation Identification (NGI) biometric database. Fingerprint examiners at the Department of Homeland Security
Biometric Support Center in San Diego provided 24 hour a day, seven days a week, support for the Lahaina wildfires,
searching their IDENT immigration biometric database (prints and faces of everyone who legally comes through port
of entry), TSA Pre-Check/Global Entry, or is detained by the US Border Patrol.
To effectively reconcile the numerous trusted source data and open source data lists, the Maui Police Department
requested assistance from the FBI. In collaboration with MPD personnel, FBI analysts from across the country
worked tirelessly to focus the information and provide a comprehensive accurate list of the missing. The dedication
and expertise of the FBI analysts played a crucial role in validating and narrowly filtering over three thousand names
to the four unaccounted individuals. Their efforts cannot be understated.
On both September 28 and September 29, 2023, eight FBI ERT members returned to Maui to assist with submitting
evidence victim transport at the morgue, and photograph organization.
A Honolulu-based FBI agent with extensive experience working alongside MPD forensics personnel was an invaluable
facilitator in contacting much needed expertise. There were many tasks that the FBI assisted with that are
documented and undocumented.
F. M.I.N.T. Meetings
The Maui Police Department’s chief, MPD personnel, HPD, Clinical Labs of Hawaii FPs, DMORT, ANDE, Grey Tech
(victim transport contractor), American Red Cross, Prosecutor’s Victim/Witness Unit, DPAA, and FBI met bi-weekly
starting August 14, 2023. To date, meetings continue to be held with the chief of police, MPD personnel, Clinical
Labs of Hawaii FP, ANDE, Grey Tech LLC, and DPAA. Daily briefings at the forensic facility were also conducted with
MPD, HPD, FBI ERT, DMORT, ANDE, and DPAA personnel from August, 8, 2023, to approximately the end of
September. On-site consultation was provided by a representative of Butte County, California Coroner’s Division,
who handled the 2018 Camp Fire with 85 deaths.
Preliminary After-Action Report, August 8, 2023
72 | P a g e
G. Identification Modalities
The first confirmed scientific identifications occurred on August 12, 2023, via fingerprint comparison. Within the
first week, seven people were identified: five via fingerprints and two via DNA. By the second week, 11 were
identified via fingerprints and 21 via DNA. Between the third and eighth week, identifications via DNA were
averaging six per week. Fourteen people were identified via dental history and two via medical device analysis.
Many were identified by multiple modalities but only the first modality was counted for positive identification
statistics. After the two-month mark, 94 of the decedents were identified. As of this writing, 99 of the 100 decedents
(99%) are positively identified (63 DNA, 17 fingerprints, 14 dental, two medical devices, and three fire-related deaths
that occurred in Oahu hospitals) (see Figure 4).
Figure 4. Scientific identification modalities charted by date. Medical device identification
not included.
On August 10, 2023, the ANDE assessment team arrived on Maui. The ANDE Rapid DNA team and instrument were
operational on August 12, 2023. Three more instruments were loaned by the California Governor’s Office of
Emergency Services, as their on-site Coroner’s Mutual Aid Coordinator was integrated into the work flow. DNA
technicians from the Butte County (CA) Sheriff’s Office, Lee County (FL) Sheriff’s Office, Kern County (CA) Sheriff’s
Office, and Riverside Country (CA) Sheriff’s Department assisted with processing and running samples. There were
four Rapid DNA instruments analyzing four and five samples simultaneously with results approximately every two
hours. As of October 8, 2023, 102 Unidentified Human Remains Rapid DNA profiles were obtained (not all unique
profiles) and 215 family reference samples were analyzed. With the help of MPD officers interviewing relatives,
3
1 1 1
1 3 3
2
2 3 6 4 4
4 2
1 1 1 2
2 3
1 2 2
2 2 3
1
1
1 7
1
1 2
1
1
1
1
1 1
1
1 1
1 1
1
1
2
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
9-Aug
16-Aug
23-Aug
30-Aug
6-Sep
13-Sep
20-Sep
27-Sep
4-Oct
11-Oct
18-Oct
NUMBER OF DECEDENTS
DATE
Decedent Identification Modalities
Fingerprint DNA Dental
Preliminary After-Action Report, August 8, 2023
73 | P a g e
family trees were constructed involving living relatives and fire victims. This enabled cross-referencing of samples
and the ability to match family reference samples to a decedent, and in turn use the sample of the decedent as a
point of reference for other deceased relatives. There were multiple family fire victims identified by linking one to
another by DNA. Video was recorded and disseminated with help from the Mayor’s and Prosecutor’s offices to
encourage family members to submit DNA samples. In addition to family members who visited the FAC to submit
reference samples (buccal swabs), we also reached out to correctional facilities both statewide and in Arizona. (The
Saguaro Correctional Center houses approximately 1,000 Hawaii inmates with long sentences).
As of October 23, 2023, there were rapid DNA identifications of 77 victims, 13 cases with DNA profiles but not
identified by DNA (12 have been identified by other modalities, leaving one case remaining to be identified), and
four cases in progress. As of December 2023, ANDE is continuing to process samples and is currently working on
challenging degraded remains in their lab.
Victims were identified by scientific means including DNA comparison, fingerprint analysis, dental comparison, and
medical device analysis. The DNA comparison necessitated taking tissue samples from the decedent and a buccal
swab from a family member for analysis. Clinical Labs of Hawaii was able to locate a surgical specimen from a medical
procedure to serve as a known DNA reference sample for one decedent. Local dentists and dental associations
provided their time and opened their records to us to compare our post mortem dental x-rays to the ante mortem
x-rays of specific people who were unaccounted for. Several dental offices were also burned and lost during the
incident, producing challenges in retrieving known dental charts/records. Hospitals provided medical records on
specific medical devices upon request.
As of November 1, 2023, the remaining four open missing persons cases were referred to the newly established Cold
Case Detail (CCD) to continue investigations. The CCD was established as a permanent team operating within MPD’s
Criminal Investigation Division (CID). A dedicated email address and phone line was established for exclusive use by
the CCD. The team will review all missing persons and cold cases for potential leads and reinvestigate if new
information becomes available.
RECOMMENDATION 25 – Have access to victim medical and dental
information, including primary care physician and dentist to streamline
identification process.
RECOMMENDATION 26 – Keep continuity of operations of existing open
missing persons cases. It is imperative to implement a permanent cold case
detail to further these efforts and investigate all cold cases.
Preliminary After-Action Report, August 8, 2023
74 | P a g e
H. Family Notifications
At the time a person was reported missing, officers taking the report would collect next of kin contact information.
This information was stored in the MPD secured records management system database, which would later serve as
the primary documentation source of recovery, transport, investigation, and identification of decedent
information. Early on, an MPD informational phone hotline and email account were created so persons directly
affected by the fire would have a direct line of communication with M.I.N.T. investigators.
Several public bulletins and media reports were released providing the public with information on how and where
to report missing persons, and the process to submit DNA for positive identification of missing family members. In
order to achieve this, a system and location were put in place with multiple agencies to facilitate the collection and
submission of DNA for family identification purposes. The DNA collection played a paramount role during the
M.I.N.T. operation for identification purposes.
Once a victim was positively identified by scientific means, a report would be generated to document the specific
details of the investigation, and forwarded to the Notification Team (one detective and two police officers). Every
effort was made to coordinate in-person notifications by local authorities for off-island families. The family
notifications were performed by five separate agencies: MPD police officers, HPD detectives, the FBI, the Billy
Graham Chaplains, and the US/Mexican Consulate. The Maui Police Department M.I.N.T. investigators would
compile all information related to the decedent. Data collection related to victim recovery were obtained by MPD
detectives, USAR Search and Rescue teams, DPAA anthropologists, ANDE DNA scientists, dentists, hospital medical
records clerks, and the forensic pathologist conducting the autopsy. This information would be compiled and
verified through various means and put into a written document that would be disclosed to the legal next of kin in-
person at the time of notification. After in-person notification was made and the next of kin’s questions were
answered, in-person religious counseling was provided if desired. Early on, it became apparent that the specific
details of the recovery, decedent condition/location, and personal property of the person killed in the fire were of
significance to the families. Once the next of kin was notified regarding the details of their loved one, they were
given a printed packet of information with specific directions on how to move forward with mortuary arrangements,
government assistance, family counseling, behavioral information, crisis outreach, and instructions on where and
how to collect property recovered with their family member. The multiple agencies involved in this process had
daily briefings where modifications and changes were discussed and implemented. This was paramount for the
necessary evolution and development of this entire process.
I. Family Briefing
A family briefing was established to help inform family members of the operations and searches that were being
conducted for their loved ones who were reported missing. The briefing consisted of the chief of police, forensic
pathologist, American Red Cross, FAC, peer support, chaplains, the prosecutor’s office, sign language personnel, and
other language translators. The venue was a large conference room at a local hotel near Lahaina. Live music and
catered food and beverages were provided to the family members of the unaccounted for/deceased victims. We
asked that immediate family, or no more than four people, attend per victim to help ensure there was enough
RECOMMENDATION 27 – Better briefings of patrol officers and missing
person call-takers to provide them with requisite information necessary for
next of kin notifications and investigative follow-ups.
Preliminary After-Action Report, August 8, 2023
75 | P a g e
seating. As they arrived, each family received a pamphlet with an outline of the key speakers and their talking points
and mental health information for dealing with traumatic events. Before the briefing, the key speakers greeted the
families as they arrived and were available for individual questions and conversations. Medical staff and plain
clothes police officers were available to assist in the event of an emergency. The family briefing was for family
members only; no press was alerted and no attorneys were allowed entry. It was asked that no one utilize cell
phones or recording devices as privacy preferences varied. The family briefing was also for the family members to
ask questions. We utilized audio visual aids for the speakers and had roving microphones for the attendees. In the
event anyone became emotionally charged, a plain clothes officer would approach and ask them to move to a
different room so they could speak one-on-one about the family members’ concerns.
Some of the problems and challenges included reaching out to all the immediate next of kin around the world and
off-island. With the help of the FBI peer support team and the National Transportation Safety Board, a script was
created and personalized for each family. The FBI peer support team contacted each individual, used the script, and
gave them the information for them to attend. This team confirmed if the family would be attending and how many
others would be with them. Another challenge was that some of the families were uneasy with trusting government
agencies as they were seeing and hearing conspiracies online, by word of mouth, and in the media. Allowing family
members to participate and having the speakers, peer support, and chaplains walk around and introduce themselves
at the beginning of the briefing helped lower tensions and emotions. At first, people were hesitant to give DNA
samples to help identify family members if remains were recovered. The forensic pathologist and prosecutor
discussed that this sample would only be used for identification purposes and nothing more, leading more people
to provide a sample after the briefing and more remains were identified. Not every next of kin affected by the loss
or unaccounted for person from the fire could attend, so a mass email utilizing the blind copy function was sent out.
We were able to distribute the information discussed at the briefing. The chief of police met with and spoke one-
on-one with families and provided up to date information.
J. Release of Remains
After positive scientific identification, consolidation of remains complete, and families had been notified of death, a
death certificate was generated in preparation for release of the victim. The positively identified and consolidated
remains were inspected one final time before the body bag was labeled with the decedent name on the bag itself
and with an additional labeled tag (containing name and both identifying numbers) before release to a mortuary.
A subset of fragmented bone remains could not be linked to only one person and were commingled with multiple
non-related individuals and were labeled as group remains. Those remains are housed at the morgue until further
arrangements have been determined.
K. Estimated Reported Number of Victims
Approximately one week after remains were recovered it was reported that there were 115 decedents lost to the
Lahaina wildfire, but that number was subject to change. MPD made sure to report that the number could change
RECOMMENDATION 28 – Include anthropology on search teams while
recovering decedents as early as possible. Note – it may not be possible
dependent on location, immediate access to resources and pending weather
conditions.
Preliminary After-Action Report, August 8, 2023
76 | P a g e
as more information was gathered. Early on it was discovered that some body bags contained commingled remains,
as the condition of the remains made it difficult to differentiate them in the field. In other cases, one individual may
have been recovered in more than one body bag. Another aspect that influenced the estimated numbers was
multiple recoveries took place at the same location with groups of individuals passing in proximity to each other.
Some recoveries were not initially recorded as a secondary search and it took anthropology and DNA results to match
and reunite the remains. There were also individuals who were flown to Oahu with fire-related injuries, and learning
their outcomes took time.
After all the autopsies and organized secondary searches were completed, an inventory of the unique remains was
performed. The estimated number was then updated to 97 decedents, but again that number was subject to change.
Since that number was reported, another set of remains was found in Lahaina, and two more individuals were known
to have died on Oahu (totaling three Oahu fire-related deaths). It was not unexpected that there would be
fluctuation in the case count. As of December 2023, there were 100 decedents reported. This number is still subject
to change pending additional information and further DNA results.